# MB16(7) (73 pages)

--- Page 1 ---
• Introduction & Definitions 
Epigenetics  (表观遗传学)
• Mechanisms of epigenetics 


--- Page 2 ---
Mendelian Genetics
Laws of inheritance 
Mendel & Morgan
DNA structure
Watson, Crick, Wilkins, Franklin
DNA 
sequence
Gene expression---
protein
Phenotype
1822-1884
    1865
1866-1945
    1928
1953


--- Page 3 ---
Epigenetics - non-Mendelian genetics
Lamarckian phenomenon
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
Charles Darwin
(1809-1882)
(1744-1829)


--- Page 4 ---
Laws of Lamarckian evolution
•
The law of use and disuse:  
• A more frequent and continuous use of any organ: gradually 
strengthens, develops and enlarges, and gives it a power 
proportional to the length of time it has been so used;
•  The permanent disuse of any organ: imperceptibly weakens and 
deteriorates, and progressively diminishes its functional capacity, 
until it finally disappears.
•
The law of inheritance of acquired characteristics: 
• All the acquisitions or losses wrought by nature on individuals, 
are preserved by reproduction to the new individuals which arise
• The acquired modifications are common to both sexes, or at 
least to the individuals which produce the young.  


--- Page 5 ---
Evidence for Lamarckism
The evolution of Giraffe necks  (Jean-Baptiste Lamarck)  
•
Giraffes stretching their necks 
to reach leaves high in trees 
(especially Acacias), strengthen 
and gradually lengthen their 
necks. 
•
These giraffes have offspring 
with slightly longer necks 
•
The phenomena is also known 
as "soft inheritance" 


--- Page 6 ---
Traditional examples considered as 
Lamarckian inheritance 
•
A blacksmith, through his 
work, strengthens the 
muscles in his arms. 
•
His sons will have similar 
muscular development when 
they mature. 


--- Page 7 ---
Paul Kammerer
(1880-1926) 
Story of Midwife toad 
•
Most frogs and toads mate in water and lay their eggs in aquatic 
environments.
•
Midwife toads mate on dry land, and males subsequently wrap the 
strings of eggs around their legs, carrying them around until the 
embryos are ready to emerge as tadpoles.


--- Page 8 ---
•
Kammerer confined the toads to a 
dry, overheated environment, 
driving them to mate and lay their 
eggs in water.
•
Most of the eggs died, but the 3% 
to 5% of offspring that survived 
had lost the terrestrial habits of 
their parents.
•
Even in cool, moist environments, 
they opted to mate and deposit 
their eggs in water, a preference 
that Kammerer said persisted for at 
least six generations, the amount of 
time Kammerer studied them.


--- Page 10 ---
Victim of his time? 
l Kammerer reported that by generation F4, ‘‘water’’ males were 
developing noticeable nuptial pads on its foot - an acquired 
characteristic brought about by adaptation to environment.
l Controversy: specimen distributed. 
l Claims arose that the result of the experiment had been falsified. 
The most notable of these claims was made by Dr. Noble in the 
scientific journal Nature in 1926. 
Six weeks later, Kammerer committed suicide.
Dr. Noble  reported that the black pad 
actually had a far more mundane 
explanation: it had simply been injected 
there with Indian ink. 


--- Page 11 ---
Science 4 September 2009:
Vol. 325. no. 5945, pp. 1194 - 1195
DOI: 10.1126/science.325_1194
Paul Kammerer has been called the perpetrator of one of the most 
celebrated scientific frauds of the early 20th century. He has also 
been defended as the victim of forgery by a lab assistant; some even 
say he was framed by political or scientific opponents. Now, a new 
analysis published this week suggests his infamous experiments may 
have been the first demonstrations of a recently recognized 
phenomenon: epigenetics. 
The Case of the Midwife Toad: Fraud or Epigenetics?
Elizabeth Pennisi 


--- Page 12 ---
•
A re-examination of Kammerer’s descriptions of hybrid 
crosses of treated and nontreated toads reveals parent-of-
origin effects like those documented in epigenetic inheritance.
 
•
Modification of the extracellular matrix of the egg provides a 
plausible cause for altered gene methylation patterns. Traits 
such as altered egg and adult body size in Kammerer’s 
‘‘treated’’ toads are inherited epigenetically in other tetrapods. 


--- Page 13 ---
Fig. 3. A preliminary epigenetic model for Paul Kammerer’s hybrid cross using a 
male ‘‘water’’ toad.


--- Page 14 ---
Fig. 3. A preliminary epigenetic model for Paul Kammerer’s hybrid cross using a 
male ‘‘water’’ toad.


--- Page 15 ---
F i g .  4 .  A h y p o t h e s i s  o n  t h e 
difference of fertilization as exposed 
to water or air in Kammerer’s basic 
experiment (Fig. 1). When exposed 
to water, only eggs fertilized with 
sperm carrying an inactive ‘‘a’’ allele 
can develop to term. Only a few 
individuals in Kammerer’s initial 
population of land toads would carry 
the rare ‘‘a’’ allele. This may explain 
the low rate of egg survival 
described by Kammerer in F1. The 
few surviving F1 toads would carry 
an ‘‘a’’ paternally inherited allele 
and a maternally inherited ‘‘A’’ allele 
that is silenced upon exposure to 
water, developing the ‘‘water’’ 
phenotype.


--- Page 16 ---
Types of inheritance
l Hard inheritance: essentially Mendelian; hereditary material 
remains constant between generations (except random mutations) 
l Soft inheritance (软式遗传) : the generation of a new phenotype is 
less rigidly determined and shows a more rapid response to environment
l
Soft inheritance is adaptive in the sense used by evolutionary biologists
l
The ability of epigenetic mechanisms to perpetuate gene expression patterns 
relatively stably, and to retain the capacity to react to environmental cues, 
makes them ideal for facilitating soft inheritance. 
l
The largest barrier to such a system is the resetting of epigenetic marks between 
generations.
l Parental effects: effects on the phenotype of offspring that are not 
determined by the offspring’s own genotype but by the genotype or 
environmental experience of its parents


--- Page 17 ---
The term ‘Epigenetics' was introduced by Conrad H. 
Waddington in 1942 to describe “The interactions of genes 
with their environment that bring the phenotype into being”. 
The current concept of 
Epigenetics: 
Changes in phenotype that are inheritable 
but do not involve DNA mutation. 
Conrad H. Waddington 
         (1905-1975) 
Definitions


--- Page 18 ---
Soft genetics and Lamarckian evolution
l Lamarck: both environment and behavior direct organic 
change in an organism’s form and guide adaptation through 
the generations.
l A major problem with Lamarckian evolution is the 
separation of germline and soma.


--- Page 19 ---
Science 7 April 2000:Vol. 288. p. 38
Was Lamarck Just a Little Bit Right?
Michael Balter 
Although Jean-Baptiste Lamarck is remembered mostly for the 
discredited theory that acquired traits can be passed down to offspring, 
new findings in the field of epigenetics, the study of changes in gene 
expression that are not linked to alterations in DNA sequences, are 
returning his name to the scientific literature. Although these new 
findings do not support Lamarck's overall concept, they raise the 
possibility that "epimutations," as they are called, could play a role in 
evolution.
Lamarck was a true pioneer of evolutionary theory! 


--- Page 20 ---
• Introduction & Definitions 
Epigenetics  (表观遗传学)
• Mechanisms of epigenetics 


--- Page 21 ---
Stories of Agouti mice (豚鼠)
 Dr. Jirtle and Waterland , Duke University


--- Page 22 ---
Agouti mice
l DNA Is Not Destiny :  
l Fat yellow mice known to scientists as agouti mice, so called 
because they carry a particular gene—the agouti gene—that in 
addition to making the rodents ravenous and yellow renders them 
prone to cancer and diabetes. 
l Typically, when agouti mice breed, most of the offspring are 
identical to the parents: just as yellow, fat as pincushions, and 
susceptible to life-shortening disease. 
l The parent mice in Jirtle and Waterland's experiment, however, 
produced a majority of offspring that looked altogether different. 
These young mice were slender and mousy brown. Moreover, they 
did not display their parents' susceptibility to cancer and diabetes 
and lived to a spry old age. The effects of the agouti gene had been 
virtually erased.


--- Page 23 ---
What make the transformation?
l Without altering a single letter of the mouse's DNA. 
l Only  changed the moms' diet
l Fed a test group of mother mice a diet rich in methyl donors. 
l These molecules are common in the environment and are found in 
many foods, including onions, garlic, beets, and in the food 
supplements often given to pregnant women. 
l After being consumed by the mothers, the methyl donors worked 
their way into the developing embryos' chromosomes and onto the 
critical agouti gene. 
l The mothers passed along the agouti gene to their children intact, but 
thanks to their methyl-rich pregnancy diet, they had added to the 
gene a chemical switch that dimmed the gene's deleterious effects.


--- Page 26 ---
Diets changes the genetics of the mother mice
l Yellow fur and brown fur mouse are genetics identical, but the ectopic 
agouti expression is different, depending on the methylation of agouti 
gene
l Maternal diet during pregnancy affects the methylation of the gene. 
l Folic acid or other methyl-rich diet, resulted in brown health 
offspring
l Exposure to Bisphenol A turns on the gene at wrong time or in 
wrong tissue


--- Page 27 ---
A Bee’s Royal Diet 
•
Royal jelly: complex, protein-rich substance secreted from glands on the heads of worker 
bees. 
• Workers and queens are genetically identical
•
With the royal jelly diet, the queen will develop functional ovaries and a larger 
abdomen for egg laying, while worker bees remain sterile. 
•
Royal jelly silences a key gene (Dnmt3), which codes for an enzyme involved in 
genome-wide gene silencing.
•
When Dnmt3 is active, the queen genes 
are epigenetically silenced and the 
larvae develop into the default “worker” 
variety.
•
When royal jelly turns Dnmt3 off, 
certain genes jump into action that turn 
the lucky larvae into queens. 
Kucharski R., Maleszka J., Foret S., Maleszka R. Nutritional Control of Reproductive Status in 
Honeybees via DNA Methylation (2008). Science, 319: 1827 - 1830. 


--- Page 28 ---
Mechanism of epigenetics 
1.
DNA methylation 
2.
Histone modification and chromatin remodeling 
3.
Small RNAs
4.
Prions 
5.
Others


--- Page 29 ---
Chromatin remodeling
• Chromatin= DNA + the histone proteins 
• Histone proteins are little spheres that DNA 
wraps around. 
• If the way that DNA is wrapped around the 
histones changes, gene expression can 
change as well. 


--- Page 30 ---
组蛋白有五种H1、H2A、H2B、H3和H4，在真核细胞中，组蛋白与DNA紧密结合
形成核小体。核小体中心由(H3—H4)2四聚体组成，H2A—H2B二聚体位于其两侧。
核小体被大约146个碱基对的DNA缠绕，多个核小体串联在一起，中间靠H1(有
20～60个碱基对DNA围绕)连接，这种结构再进一步弯曲、折叠即形成染色质。用
微球菌核酸酶和3M脲素消化核小体，分解出3个亚基：H1与60—70个碱基对DNA
复合体；H2A—H2B与50—60个碱基对DNA复合体以及(H3—H4)2与70～80个碱
基对DNA复合物。在合适的条件中，这些组蛋白—DNA复合体处于可溶性稳定状
态。


--- Page 31 ---
Mechanisms of chromatin 
remodeling
l Modification of histone proteins: 
      Histone proteins are made up of long chains of amino acids. If the amino acids that are in 
the chain are changed, the shape of the histone sphere might be modified.   By altering the 
shape of the histones around it, these modified histones would ensure that a differentiated 
cell would stay differentiated, and not convert back into being a stem cell. 
l Methylation of  DNA, at CpG sites:
      to convert cytosine to 5-methylcytosine. Cytosine is the nucleotide that our cells can 
"read." Our cells cannot "read" methylcytosine. If DNA is conceived as an instruction 
manual again, changing cytosine to methylcytosine, the cell can no longer "read" the gene. 
Thus, the gene is turned off. 


--- Page 32 ---
Histone code
l Histone code (组蛋白密码)：组蛋白在翻译后的修饰
中会发生改变，提供一种识别的标志，为其他蛋白和
DNA的结合产生不同效应（协同或拮抗）。是一种动
态转录调控成分。
Modifications of the Histone tails act as marks that
can be read by other proteins to control the expression or
replication of chromosomal regions. The coding in the
histones may be heritable.
Generally, histone acetylation is associated with　transcriptionally 
active genes
Deactylation is associated with inactive genes　(= gene silencing)


--- Page 33 ---
Histone modifications
l Throughout the entire sequence, particularly in the 
unstructured termini of histones -  “histone tails” 
l Including: 
l Acetylation:  associated with "active" transcription
 acetylation of the K14 and K9 lysines of the tail of histone H3 by 
histone acetyltransferase enzymes (HATs) is generally correlated 
with transcriptional competence
l Methylation: 
l Ubiquitylation
l Phosphorylation
l Sumoylation


--- Page 34 ---
l
Different combinations of histone modifications, especially located near or 
within a gene’s promoter, may be VERY SPECIFIC to the transcriptional state 
of the gene
Histone Modifications


--- Page 35 ---
 
Enzymes providing histone 
modifications
Acetylation: HATs - CBP, p300, GCN5, ATF2, Tip 60…
Deacetylation: HDACs- class I and II
Methylation: 
•Lysine : SET-domain HMTase and non-SET domain HMTase (Dot1) 
•Arginine: PRMT family, CARM1
Demethylation: LSD1(demethylate mono- and di-methylated 
lysines )
Ubiquitination: ubiquitin conjugase Rad6/ligase Bre1　for H2B
De-Ubiquitination: SAGA-associated Ubp10


--- Page 36 ---
Enzymes providing histone 
methyaltion
 Methylated histones first described in 1964, Murray 1964 Biochemistry 3, 10-15 


--- Page 37 ---
Histone demethylase LSD-1
Metzger et al. (2005)
Shi et al., (2004).


--- Page 38 ---
Histone variants
K. Sharma 2005,NATURE REVIEWS


--- Page 39 ---
Connection between histone 
variants and modifications
Variant histones are assembled by specific complexes
Example:    The modifications shown by ChIP to be enriched in active 
chromatin, including acetylation of K9, K14, K18 and K23 and 
methylation of K4 and K79, were found to be enriched two to fivefold 
in H3.3 relative to H3. 
Example: The SWR1(Snf2/Snf2-related ATPase)  complex appears to 
destabilize the nucleosome, exchanging H2A.Z–H2B for H2A–H2B. 


--- Page 40 ---
Histone code hypothesis
 
Something is writing this code….
  
and 
Something is reading this code… 


--- Page 41 ---
DNA Methylation and CpGs sites 
•
DNA methylation:  a type of chemical modification of DNA 
that can be inherited and subsequently removed without changing 
the original DNA sequence
•
CpG sites:  regions of DNA where a cytosine nucleotide occurs next to a 
guanine nucleotide in the linear sequence of bases along its length. 
•
C in CpG dinucleotides can be methylated by DNA methyltransferases in 
many eukaryotic organisms to form 5-methylcytosine. 
•  ~ 70%-80% of C in CpG are methylated.


--- Page 42 ---
Frequency of CpGs sites
l CpG frequency: 1% in human genome, lower than expected (4X)
l Expected: 
l
GC content in human genome: 42%
l
Frequency of G or C: 21%
l
Frequency of  CpG: 0.21*0.21=4.41%
l Why? 
l Transitions (C-T) occur at 10-40 fold higher than other dinucleotides.
l Thus, CpGs are not randomly distributed in the genome.


--- Page 43 ---
CpG islands
l CpG islands: regions of DNA that have a higher concentration 
of unmethylated CpG sites.
l ~ 70%-80% of all CpGs are methylated in mammals, CpGs are 
methylated in repeats and 3’ regions of genes, but not in CpG 
islands.
l Unmethylated CpGs are grouped in clusters called "CpG 
islands" that are present in the 5' regulatory regions of many genes.
l CpG islands are associated with the start of the gene.
l a CpG island is used to help in the prediction and annotation of 
genes
~ 26,000-45,000 CpG islands, many located in the promoter regions of 
housekeeping genes and some tissue specific genes.


--- Page 44 ---
Methylation, silencing, and cancer
l Methylation of CpG sites within the promoters 
of genes can lead to their silencing, 
l human cancers: the silencing of tumor suppressor 
genes: 
As many as 50% of point mutations in p53 gene in human 
tumors occur at CpG. 
l In contrast, the hypomethylation (低甲基化) of 
CpG sites has been associated with the over-
expression of oncogenes within cancer cells.


--- Page 45 ---
How does methylation occur?
• De Novo methylation (重新甲基化 ): DNA methylation patterns is 
set up early in development. What signals de novo methylation? Some 
evidence that repeats may alter chromatin structure and signal de novo 
methylation. 
• Maintenance Methylation- DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) is the 
proposed maintenance methyltransferase that is responsible for copying 
DNA methylation patterns to the daughter strands during DNA 
replication. 
• DNA demethylation:  a process of removal of methyl group from 
nucleotide in DNA. 
•
Passive demethylation:  takes place in the absence of methylation of 
newly synthesised DNA strands by DNMT1
•
Active demethylation:  Active DNA demethylation occurs via active 
dismiss of methyl group.


--- Page 46 ---
DNA Methylases
-Dnmt 1 thought to be primarily a maintenance methylase. 10-40 fold preference 
for hemimethylated DNA. Localizes to replication loci.
-Dnmt 3A and 3B are thought to be de novo methylases. DNMT3 family contain 
similar catalytic domain, but different regulatory domains. Contains a PHD (plant 
homeodomain) found in many chromatin associated proteins.


--- Page 47 ---
Dnmts
l
The Knock-out of any of the methyltransferase genes is lethal during 
development (Dnmt 1 or 3B) or shortly thereafter (3A; about 4 weeks of age).
l
mutations in Dnmt3B cause ICF syndrome (Imunodeficiency, centromeric 
instability, facial anomalies).


--- Page 48 ---
Interaction between DNA methylation 
and Histone acetylation
Transcriptionally active DNA- unmethylated DNA with acetylated histones
Repressed (silent) DNA- methylated DNA with deacetylated histones 


--- Page 49 ---
Prions (感染性蛋白质,朊病毒）
" Prion" is short for "Proteinaceous Infectious particle”
Prions: are infectious forms of proteins. Proteins generally fold into 
discrete units which perform distinct cellular functions, but some proteins 
are also capable of forming an infectious conformational state known as a 
prion. 
•
Although often viewed in the context of infectious disease, 
•
Also is defined by their ability to catalytically convert other native 
state versions of the same protein to an infectious conformational 
state. 
•
~ as epigenetic agents: inducing a phenotypic change without a 
modification of the genome.
Fungal prions are considered epigenetic because the infectious 
phenotype caused by the prion can be inherited without modification of 
the genome. 


--- Page 50 ---
Transgenerational epigenetic effects
l ~ effects: phenotypes present in successive generations that are not genetically 
determined.
l ~ inheritance (gametic epigenetic inheritance): a phenotype present in 
successive generations that is nongenetically determined and results from 
epigenetic modifications passed via the gametes that escape reprogramming
•  Epigenetic modification: 
Methylation of CpG + modification of chromatin protein
•  Erase the epigenetic markers: 
Germline and somatic reprogramming


--- Page 51 ---
Transgenerational epigenetic 
effects≠  ~  inheritance


--- Page 52 ---
Adaptive parental effect
lAdaptive maternal effects exist in plants.
Environmental stimuli acting on the mother, including predation, 
competition, soil type, temperature, light, and nutrient availability has been 
found to induce changes to F1 phenotype.
lPolygonum persicaria (春蓼) 
l offspring of grown under low light allocate proportionately more 
resources to shoot growth than those of parents with higher light 
exposures. 
l Conversely, offspring of limited nutrient plants allocate 
proportionately more to root growth than genetically similar 
individuals with nutrient-rich parents


--- Page 53 ---
Radishes and caterpillars 
(Agrawal, 1999)
l Radishes produce physical spines and insect-repellent 
chemicals in response to predation by caterpillars 
l Seedlings from parent plants that had been damaged by 
caterpillars develop phenotypic features (spines) more like 
their parents than seedlings from unexposed plants. 
l These changes to the F1 are associated with reduced 
predation from caterpillars.


--- Page 54 ---
Transgenerational inheritance of 
mothering style and stress in rat
l High LG-ABN mothering leads to increased expression of 
the transcription factor nerve growth factor inducible 
protein A (NGFI-A). 
l Binding of NGFI-A to the promoter of the glucocorticoid (GR) 
receptor to stimulates DNA hypomethylation, histone 
acetylation, and increased expression of GR. 
l Higher GR in the hippocampus（海马） are associated with 
reduced stress levels. 
l The epigenetic marks maintain the GR expression state into 
adulthood and in females will determine the level of LG-ABN 
mothering, thus perpetuating the phenotype. 


--- Page 55 ---
仔细照料
粗心照料
Expression of the  transcription factor,  nerve growth factor inducible protein A (NGFI-A), is 
controlled by the way how the mother is taking care of the offspring
LG: licking, grooming
ABN: arched-back nursing


--- Page 56 ---
Some interesting examples of 
epigenetic inheritance and variation


--- Page 57 ---
Too big!   Apparently as a result of abnormal imprinting, 
the cloned lamb at left is bigger than the normal lamb at right. 
Cloned animals often have other health problems as well. 


--- Page 58 ---
Genomic imprinting can be defined as the 
gamete-of-origin dependent modification 
of phenotype. 
Paternal imprinting:  an allele 
inherited from the father is not 
expressed in offspring. 
Maternal imprinting: an allele 
inherited from the mother is not 
expressed in offspring. 
Body color
 (hypothetical)


--- Page 59 ---
"parent-of-origin effects" discovered ~3000 years ago 
by mule breeders in Asia.


--- Page 60 ---
X-chromosome Inactivation 
•  X-inactivation:  a process by which one of the two copies of the X 
chromosome present in female mammals is inactivated. 
•
The inactive X chromosome is silenced by packaging into 
transcriptionally inactive heterochromatin. X-inactivation occurs 
so that the female, with two X chromosomes, does not have twice 
as many X chromosome gene products as the male, which only 
possess a single copy of the X chromosome
•
The choice of which X chromosome will be inactivated is random 
in placental mammals such as mice and humans, but once an X 
chromosome is inactivated it will remain inactive throughout the 
lifetime of the cell. 
•
Unlike the random X-inactivation in placental mammals, 
inactivation in marsupials applies exclusively to the paternally 
derived X chromosome. 


--- Page 61 ---
 Epigenetic variation among monozygous twins
Monozygous twins are considered genetically identical, but 
significant phenotypic discordance between them exist, 
which is particularly noticeable for psychiatric diseases.
Monozygous Twins with 
Different Hair Color 


--- Page 62 ---
Although MZ twins are epigenetically indistinguishable during early years 
of life, older MZ twins exhibited remarkable differences in their overall 
content and genomic distribution of 5-methylcytosine DNA and histone 
acetylation, affecting their gene expression portrait.
 Epigenetic variation among monozygous twins
Fraga et al. 2005, PNAS 102: 10604-9


--- Page 63 ---
你遗传给后代的比你想象的要多
——表观遗传的祖辈“原罪”
原创 2016-06-10 丁广进 赛先生
Other cases
受饥荒影响的女性所生后代易发代谢和精神疾病
吃不饱的孕鼠后代个头小易患糖尿病
                                     
2014年，来自剑桥大学和哈佛医学院的研究团队发表在《科
学》上的论文通过使用小鼠模型，模拟了妊娠期营养不良对
后代的影响（给怀孕12.5天到18.5天的小鼠喂食比平时少
50%热量的食物），发现该种情况下孕育的后代（F1代）个
体较小、且更易患糖尿病，令人更为惊讶的是这些雄性小鼠
（F1代，在没有饮食限制的前提下）的后代（F2代）也出现
了相同的症状。
                                                                              Science, 345(6198), 1255903.


--- Page 64 ---
吃太好所生后代出现代谢紊乱
在2014年12月4日发表在《细胞》（Cell）杂志上的封面文章
中，研究人员在雄性果蝇交配的前两天内增加其饮食的糖含量
，然后使之与正常饮食的雌果蝇交配。雌果蝇产下的卵经过正
常发育至成年后，与正常营养条件下繁殖的后代相比，其体
重偏大且甘油三酯水平显著升高。 Cell, 159(6), 1352-1364.
2015年年底，来自中科院段恩奎、翟琦巍、周琪等课题组合
作发表在《Science》上的研究，运用高脂饲喂诱导的父代肥
胖小鼠模型，发现一类成熟精子中高度富集的小
RNA(tsRNAs)可作为一种表观遗传信息的载体，将高脂诱导
的父代代谢紊乱表型遗传给子代。
                                                              Science. 2016，351(6271):397-400.


--- Page 65 ---
父辈的恐惧情绪记忆可遗传至子代
2013年，发表在《Nature Neuroscience》上的一篇论文
激起表观遗传学领域的专家学者热烈的讨论。在这篇文章
中，来自美国埃默里大学医学院等研究机构人员通过使用
电击等手段使实验鼠对某种气味（苯乙酮）产生恐惧，然
后对他们进行正常饲养。结果发现实验组小鼠的后代都会
对这种气味非常敏感，并表现出恐惧感，即便是通过人工
授精获得的后代（第三代）也不例外。
 
                                                 Nature neuroscience, 17(1), 89-96.


--- Page 66 ---
“组蛋白去甲基化酶KDM6B调控了红耳龟
的温度依赖型性别决定”
红耳龟在较低的孵化温度(26℃)产
生 100%的雄性子代, 较高的温度
(32℃)则产生全雌子代, 是 TSD 机
制研究的一个理想动物模型。
浙江万里学院葛楚天等 Science. 2018.5
在性腺分化前，Kdm6b
能快速响应温度变化。
KDM6B通过消除启动
子区H3K27me3标记，
直接促进红耳龟雄性性
别决定基因Dmrt1的表
达。


--- Page 67 ---
Science重要发现：母爱竟会改变孩子DNA
母亲的关怀（maternal 
care）与海马体的L1拷贝
数量之间存在相关性：拥
有细心母亲的小鼠携带的
L1拷贝数较少，而拥有疏
忽大意母亲的小鼠拥有更
多的L1拷贝。“生母疏忽
大意但养母细心的小鼠”
比“生母细心但养母疏忽
大意的小鼠”拥有更少的
L1拷贝。


--- Page 68 ---
越来越多的证据表明，在不改变遗传物质DNA序列的情况下
，上一辈可以将在不良营养习惯和环境压力产生的某些获得
性性状遗传给下一代，这种传递通常是通过表观遗传的方式
进行的。值得注意的是，目前在哺乳动物中获得的实验数据
表明，获得性性状的遗传很难像经典遗传学中的基因突变持
续遗传下去，实验数据表明这种遗传很难超过三代，但是不
可否认这种遗传方式具有重要意义。人们应该从这些科学研
究中，认识到自身的生活饮食习惯、所处环境、心态情绪等
对下一代可能造成的影响。


--- Page 69 ---
Multigenerational cold 
stress induces heritable 
ACT1 promoter 
hypomethylation, 
enabling rice to acquire 
cold tolerance for high-
latitude adaptation.
Song et al., 2025, Cell 188, 1–12
Inheritance of acquired adaptive cold tolerance in rice 
through DNA methylation


--- Page 70 ---
母亲孕期铁元素缺乏竟能让儿子变女儿！
在孕期缺铁的小鼠中，部分本应发育为雄性的胚胎，
竟发育出卵巢结构，最终表现出雌性表型。


--- Page 71 ---
表观遗传信息的丢失是哺乳动物衰老的原因之一
真核生物的衰老是由于转录
网络和表观遗传信息随着时
间的推移而丢失，由一种保
守机制驱动，该机制进化为
共同调节对细胞损伤的反应
，如DSB或挤压损伤。
哈佛医学院
David Sinclair
DNA变化不是衰老的唯一原
因。相反，染色质的化学和
结构变化在不改变遗传密码
本身的情况下加速衰老。


--- Page 72 ---
Thank you for your support ,
wish you all GREAT SUCCESS !
你是你，也可以是更好的你！


--- Page 73 ---
Contact information
Mao Chuanzao 毛传澡
l Tel: 0571-88206108; 131-1571-2387
l E-mail: mcz@zju.edu.cn


